Precision Mapping of Retinal Disease: Identification of Differential Progression Trajectories via Imaging Phenomics


Authors:
Christian Anderson 1, Liam Scott 2,3, Irene Leung 4, Ferenc Sallo 5, Catherine Egan 4, Tunde Peto 6, The MacTel Consortium *, Melanie Bahlo 2,3, Martin Friedlander 1,7, Simone Tzaridis1,7, Lea Scheppke 1, Roberto Bonelli 1**

Affiliations:
1 The Lowy Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, USA 
2 Genetics and Gene Regulation Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Australia
3 Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Australia
4 Moorfields Eye Hospital, Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, United Kingdom
5 Hôpital Ophtalmique Jules-Gonin, Fondation Asile des Aveugles, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland
6 Center for Public Health, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom 
7 The Scripps Research Institute, USA

* The list of contributing investigators is available in Supplementary Table 12.
** Corresponding author: Roberto Bonelli (rbonelli@lmri.net)


Acknowledgements
We thank the volunteers who participated in this study. We thank all the clinical graders who diligently collected the phenotypic data from patients' images. A list of contributing clinical sites is available in Supplementary Table 12. We are grateful to Marin Gantner and Kevin Eade for their helpful discussion. Support for this study came from the Lowy Medical Research Institute.

Ethics approval and consent to participate. 
The study was conducted in compliance with the study protocol, the International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) E6 Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines, and applicable U.S. regulatory requirements, including 45 CFR 46 (Protection of Human Subjects) and 21 CFR Part 56 (Institutional Review Boards). The study protocol was approved by Sterling, a central Institutional Review Board (IRB), and by site-specific institutional review boards, as applicable. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to enrollment. The Emmes Corporation (Rockville, MD, USA) served as the coordinating center for the study.


Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Funding
M.B. is supported by an Investigator grant from the National Health and Medical Research Council (APP1195236). This work was also supported by the Victorian 5
Government’s Operational Infrastructure Support Program and the National Health and Medical Research Council Independent Research Institute Infrastructure Support Scheme (IRIISS).

Author contributions
C.A. performed the data analyses and wrote the manuscript. R.B. conceived and supervised the study and wrote the manuscript. S.T. provided clinical understanding of the findings. L.Sco. and M.B. cleaned and provided the genetic data, I.L., F.S., C.E., and T.P. clinically graded the images. L.Sch. and M.F. provided access to the phenotypic data and facilitated the study. All authors contributed to the writing and final approval of the manuscript.

Data availability
Summary statistics not provided in this manuscript are available upon request.

Use of AI
Artificial intelligence was used to improve the clarity of sentences across the manuscript. The content of the manuscript adheres strictly to the original writing of the authors and has been extensively checked.

